Captioning sponsored by
MacNEIL/LEHRER PRODUCTIONS
>> Woodruff: STIFF WINDS, ICE
AND SNOW GRIPPED THE
NORTHEASTERN U.S. AS FRIGID
TEMPERATURES SHOW NO MERCY.
GOOD EVENING, I JUD'MY WOODRUFF.
ALSO AHEAD, FROM CALIFORNIA, A
LOOK AT LATINO SENIOR CITIZENS
LEANG MNIORE ON LONG-TERM CARE
FACILITIES.
>> YOU CAN HAVE A HOMELIKE
ENVIRONMENT, BUT YET STILL BE
ABLE TO READ YOUR NEWSPAPER WITH
YOUR COFFEE IN THE MORNING, AND
HAVE THOSE LITTLE COMFORTS.
AND THEN YOU CAN HAVE A BIG
FIESTA FEAST WITH A MARIACHI
BAND.
>> Woodruff: AND IT'S FRIDAY.
MARK SHIELDS AND DAVID BROOKS
ARE HERE TO ANALYZE THE WEEK'S
NEWS.
THOSE ARE JUST SOME OF THE
STORIES WE'RE COVERING ON
TONIGHT'S "PBS NEWSHOUR."
>> Woodruff: THAT BLUSTERY
WINTER STORM DROPPED A FOOT OF
SNOW ON THE MIDWEST BEFORE
SETTING ITS SIGHTS ON THE
NORTHEAST, WHERE TODAY IT CLOSED
SCHOOLS, AND SNARLED COMMUTES ON
THE GROUND AND IN THE AIR.
AT LEAST 13 DEATHS WERE BLAMED
ON THE STORM, MANY FROM CAR
ACCIDENTS.
HARI SREENIVASAN HAS OUR REPORT.
>> Sreenivasan: SNOW PLOWS
ACROSS THE NORTHEAST STARTED
WORKING EARLY AND OFTEN, IN AN
EFFORT TO ERASE THE FIRST BIG
STORM OF THE NEW YEAR.
THOUGH THE SNOW HAS MOSTLY
TAPERED OFF NOW, IT'S THE DROP
IN TEMPERATURE THAT'S CAUSE FOR
CONCERN.
>> AT SUB-ZERO TEMPERATURES YOU
WORRY ABOUT FROST BITE.
YOU'RE WORRIED ABOUT
HYPOTHERMIA.
>> Sreenivasan: AND IN A PRESS
CONFERENCE THIS AFTERNOON,
MASSACHUSETTS GOVERNOR DEVAL
PATRICK SAID IT COULD HAVE BEEN
WORSE.
>> MOTHER NATURE IS FICKLE AS
YOU KNOW AND HAS A MIND OF HER
OWN.
WE HAD A-- FROM MY PERSPECTIVE,
A LUCKY BREAK OR TWO.
ONE IS THAT THE STORM CAME
LARGELY IN EVENING AND NOT IN
THE MIDDLE OF A WORKDAY.
I MEAN, STARTED LARGELY IN THE
EVENING.
AND IT FOLLOWED THE FORECAST
THAT HASN'T ALWAYS HAPPENED.
>> Sreenivasan: WIND GUSTS OF UP
TO 50 MILES-PER-HOUR WERE
REPORTED IN PARTS OF
MASSACHUSETTS, AND WIND CHILLS
AS LOW AS MINUS-30 DEGREES.
BOSTON WAS HARD-HIT WITH NEARLY
14 INCHES OF SNOW BLANKETING THE
CITY'S STREETS, AND COMMUNITIES
TO THE WEST GOT NEARLY DOUBLE
THAT AMOUNT.
COASTAL FLOODING IS NOW THE
BIGGEST CONCERN IN SCITUATE,
MASSACHUSETTS.
MANY RESIDENTS HAVE ALREADY
EVACUATED THEIR HOMES.
NEW YORK AND NEW JERSEY WERE
STILLNDER U STATES OF EMERGENCY.
>> WE CAN SAFELY SAY WE'VE HAD
OUR FIRST SIGNIFICANT SNOWFALL
OF THIS YEAR.
>> Sreenivasan: IN NEW YORK
CITY, BILL DE BLASIO FACED HIS
FIRST MAJOR CHALLENGE AS THE NEW
MAYOR, ASKING PEOPLE TO LET THE
STREET CLEANERS DO THEIR JOBS.
>> CAN TELL YOU ALREADY, WE HAVE
A VERY POWDERY SNOW.
>> Sreenivasan: EARLIER THIS
MORNING, HE TOOK TO HIS OWN
DRIVEWAY, TO SHOVEL SNOW OUTSIDE
HIS BROOKLYN HOME.
BY MID-DAY MOST OF THE
COMMERCIAL CENTERS OF NEW YORK
CITY WERE UP AND RUNNING.
TRAFFIC WAS MOVING WELL, THE SUN
WAS OUT, TEMPERATURES WERE IN
THE HIGH TEENS.
BUT UP NORTH, THE BITING COLD
TEMPERATURES AND WIND CHILL MADE
THINGS MUCH MORE DIFFICULT.
IN MAINE, THE SUB-ZERO
TEMPERATURES KEPT MANY PEOPLE
INSIDE.
BUT SOME TOURISTS STILL BRAVED
THE ARCTIC AIR AT A HISTORICAL
MILITARY ATTRACTION.
>> BONE CHILLING.
MOST  ME OFIS WARM, EXCEPT FOR
MY LEGS.
>> Sreenivasan: AND AIRPORTS
ACROSS THE U.S. REMAINED BACKED
UP, WITH HOLIDAY TRAVELERS
STRANDED AFTER MORE THAN 2,000
FLIGHTS WERE CANCELED TODAY.
>> THE WARNING HAS BEEN COMING
FOR A COUPLE OF DAYS, SO WE
EXPECTED IT.
WE BOOKED A HOTEL HERE.
AND WE'RE STUC WE'K;LL MAKE THE
BEST OF IT.
>> Sreenivasan: AND ALTHOUGH THE
MIDWEST WAS HIT WITH THE WORST
OF THE STORM EARLIER THIS WEEK,
THE ARCTIC AIR STILL LINGERS
ACROSS THE REGION.
>> Woodruff: THE OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION ANNOUNCED TWO NEW
EXECUTIVE ACTIONS AFFECTING
BACKGROUND CHECKS FOR GUN BUYERS
TODAY.
BOTH FOCUS ON LIMITING FIREARM
ACCESS FOR PEOPLE WITH MENTAL
HEALTH ISSUES.
ONE RULE LETS HOSPITALS SUBMIT
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION ABOUT A
PATIENT'S MENTAL HEALTH INTO THE
BACKGROUND CHECK SYSTEM.
PRESIDENT OBAMA PROPOSED TOUGH
GUN CONTROL MEASURES IN CONGRESS
LAST YEAR IN THE WAKE OF THE
NEWTOWN SCHOOL SHOOTINGS, BUT
THEY GOT LITTLE SUPPORT
THE ADMINISTRATION ALSO TOOK
STEPS ON THE NATIONAL SECURITY
AGENCY'S SURVEILLANCE PROGRAM
TODAY, AMID CONFLICTING COURT
DECISIONS ABOUT ITS LEGALITY.
U.S. OFFICIALS WERE IN THE
PROCESS OF ASKING THE FOREIGN
INTELLIGENCE SURVEILLANCE COURT
TO RENEW THE N.S.A.'S PHONE
COLLECTION PROGRAM FOR ANOTHER
90 DAYS.
AND THE DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
FILED ITS EXPECTED APPEAL TO
OVERTURN A JUDGE'S FEDERAL
RULING THAT THE PHONE RECORDS
PROGRAM WAS LIKELY
UNCONSTITUTIONAL.
THE JUSTICE DEPARTMENT ALSO TOOK
ACTION IN A CHALLENGE TO THE NEW
HEALTH CARE LAW, CALLING FOR AN
END TO A BLOCK ON ITS BIRTH
CONTROL MANDATE.
THE LAW REQUIRES SOME RELIGIOUS
ORGANIZATIONS TO PROVIDE HEALTH
INSURANCE THAT INCLUDES COVERAGE
OF CONTRACEPTION.
BUT THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION
SAID THOSE RELIGIOUS
NON-PROFITS CAN EXEMPT
THEMSELVES FROM THE REQUIREMENT.
ON TUESDAY, SUPREME COURT
JUSTICE SONIA SOTOMAYOR DELAYED
THE MANDATE'S IMPLEMENTATION
HOURS BEFORE IT WAS TO GO INTO
EFFECT.
THE U.S. EMBASSY IN SOUTH SUDAN
EVACUATED MORE OF ITS STAFF
TODAY BECAUSE OF ESCALATING
VIOLENCE.
AND STARTING TOMORROW CONSULAR
SERVICES FOR AMERICAN CITIZENS
WILL BE SUSPENDED.
IN WASHINGTON, A STATE
DEPARTMENT SPOKESWOMAN SAID THEY
WERE WORKING HARD TO AIRLIFT OUT
AMERICANS, AND OTHERS, AMID THE
ONGOING POLITICAUNREL ST.
>> WE'VE EVACUATED OVER 440 U.S.
OFFICIALS AND PRIVATE CITIZENS
AND MORE THAN 750 CITIZENS OF AT
LEAST 27 OTHER COUNTRIES ON
EIGHT CHARTERED FLIGHTS AND NINE
MILITARY AIRCRAFT.
WHO REMAINS?
THE AMBASSADOR, A FEW KEY
PERSONNEL AND, OF COURSE,
SECURITY AT OUR FACILITY THERE,
BOTH OURS AND DOD.
BUT I THINK WE'RE CERTAINLY OPEN
TO DOING MORE EVACUATIONS, IF
THERE'S A NEED, DEPENDING ON
SECURITY.
>> Woodruff: AS MANY AS 75,000
PEOPLE HAVE FLED THE VIOLENCE IN
THE CITY OF BOR.
MOST OF THE DISPLACED FAMILIES
ARE CAMPING OUT IN THE NILE
RIVER REGION OF AWERIAL WITHOUT
SANITATION OR CLEAN DRINKING
WATER.
HUMANITARIAN ORGANIZATIONS ARE
STRUGGLING TO QUICKLY DELIVER
AID TO THAT AREA.
IN SEATTLE, WASHINGTON, 30,000
BOEING MACHINSTS VOTED ON A
CRITICAL LABOR CONTRACT TODAY,
WITH BILLIONS OF DOLLARS AND
THOUSANDS OF JOBS ON THE LINE.
IF WORKERS AGREE TO CONCESSIONS
ON PENSION AND HEALTH CARE
BENEFITS, BOEING WILL BUILD ITS
NEW 777X JETLINER AND WINGS IN
SEATTLE.
IF THEY REJECT THE CONTRACT,
BOEING HAS SAID IT WILL LOOK TO
A NUMBER OF OTHER STATES
INTERESTED IN HOSTING A NEW
FACTORY.
A FINAL TALLY IS EXPECTED LATE
TONIGHT.
WE'LL HAVE MORE ON WHAT'S AT
STAKE LATER IN THE PROGRAM.
IN ECONOMIC NEWS, 2013 TURNED
OUT TO BE THE BEST SINGLE YEAR
FOR THE AUTO INDUSTRY IN THE
PAST SIX.
FORD LED ALL MAJOR AUTOMAKERS
WITH AN
WITH AN 11% JUMP IN SALES,
CHRYSLER AND NISSAN TRAILED
BEHIND AT 9%, AND GENERAL MOTORS
ENDED THE YEAR UP 7%.
THE MONTH OF DECEMBER DIDN'T SEE
SUCH A BRISK SALES PACE,
ATTRIBUTED IN PART TO BAD WINTER
WEATHER AND A BLACK FRIDAY
SHOPPING SURGE IN NOVEMBER.
STOCKS ON WALL STREET CONTINUED
TO HAVE A SLUGGISH START ON THE
SECOND DAY OF TRADING IN THE NEW
YEAR.
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
GAINED 28 POINTS
TO CLOSE AT NEARLY
16,470.
THE NASDAQ FELL
11 POINTS TO CLOSE ABOVE 4,131.
FOR THE WEEK, THE DOW LOST A
FRACTION OF A PERCENT.
THE NASDAQ FELL MORE THAN HALF A
PERCENT.
STILL TO COME ON THE "NEWSHOUR":
A RISE IN SECTARIAN VIOLENCE IN
IRAQ; THE RIFT AMONG UNION
WORKERS AT BOEING; A STUDY
LINKING MEDICAID AND INCREASED
E.R. VISITS; LATINOS LEANING
MORE ON LONG-TERM CARE
FACILITIES, PLUS, SHIELDS AND
BROOKS.
TWO KEY IRAQI CITIES HAVE BEEN
THE SCENE OF INTENSE SECTARIAN
FIGHTING FOR NEARLY A WEEK.
SUNNI MILITANTS ALIGNED WITH AL-
QAEDA HAVE ESCALATED A BATTLE
AGAINST SHIITE-LED GOVERNMENT
TROOPS.
IT'S ALL TAKING PLACE IN THE
WESTERN PROVINCE OF ANBAR,
WHERE U.S. TROOPS SUFFERED THEIR
GREATEST LOSSES DURING THE
EIGHT YEAR WAR.
IN FALLUJA TODAY, MILITANTS BLEW
UP SEVERAL GOVERNMENT BUILDINGS
INCLUDING THE POLICE
HEADQUARTERS AND MAYOR'S OFFICE.
VIOLENCE ALSO PICKED UP IN
RAMADI.
THE AL-QAEDA LINKED FIGHTERS ARE
SEEKING TO CONTROL BOTH CITIES.
THE MILITANTS FIGHT UNDER THE
SAME BANNER AS JIHADISTS IN
SYRIA-- EVIDENCE THAT COUNTRY'S
CIVIL WAR IS SPILLING BEYOND
IT'S BORDERS.
BUT IT IS NOT A CLEAN SECTARIAN
SPLIT.
POWERFUL SUNNI TRIBES IN ANBAR
HAVE ALLIED WITH THE GOVERNMENT
TROOPS TO FIGHT AL-QAEDA, AS
THEY DID WITH U.S. TROOPS IN
2007, IN A MOVE CALLED THE
AWAKENING WHICH HELPED TURN THE
TIDE OF THE WAR.
TO HELP US UNDERSTAND THIS
LATEST BLOODSHED, WE TURN TO
FORMER U.S. AMBASSADOR TO IRAQ
RYAN CROCKER.
AND FORMER MARINE CAPT. BING
WEST, WHO SPENT A LOT OF TIME IN
IRAQ, PARTICULARLY IN ANBAR, AND
TEST GENTLEMEN, WE THANK
BOTH.
BING WEST TO YOU FIRST, WHAT
IS GOING ON IN ANBAR
PROVINCE?
>> WELL, I THINK JUDY THAT
AL QAEDA HAS MADE A BIG
MISTAKE.
THEY WENT INTO THE CITIES
BELIEVING THE CITIES WOULD
UPRISE WITH THEM, SOMETHING
EQUIVALENT TO WHAT THE
VOTECONG DID IN 1978 IN THE
TET OFFENSIVE AND THE PEOPLE
HAVE NO INTENTIONS OF UPRISE
WITH THEM AND THE MAJOR
TRIBES HAVE TURNED AGAINST
THEM.
AND SO I THINK AL QAEDA
ACTUALLY HAS OVERPLAYED ITS
HAND.
>> Woodruff: ROY AN CROCKER,
DO YOU SEE IT THE SAME WAY,
AL QAEDA MOVING IN, TRAYING
TO GET A FOOTHOLD,
OVERPLAYING ITS HAND?
>> WE'VE SEEN THIS BEFORE,
BING AND I, AND I THINK HE
IS EXACTLY RIGHT.
AL QAEDA OVERPLAYED ITS HAND
IN THE O 5EE, '06 PERIOD
THAT HAD THE POPULATION
READY TO TURN TO US IN AT
WAKENING.
AND WE'RE SEEING ANOTHER
PLAY OF THEIR HAND AGAIN,
RAISING THE BLACK FLAG OF AL
QAEDA ON IRAQI SOUL.
AND THE ADVENT OF FOREIGN
FIGHTERS IS PARTICULARLY
A-- OF THE TRIBES, THESE
TRIBES WILL AND ARE FIGHTING
TO SECURE THEIR OWN CITIES,
AND WE'VE SEEN THE
GOVERNMENT FINALLY DO
SOMETHING SENSIBLE WHICH IS
QUIT ANTAGONIZING THE
SUNNIES, GIVE THEM MONEY,
GIVE THEM ARMS AND FIGHT
SHOULD TORE SHOULDER.
>> Woodruff: WHAT IS IT THAT
AL QAEDA WANTS HERE, BING
WEST, IS IT THEY JUST SIMPLY
WANT TERRITORY?
WHAT IS THIS ABOUT?
>> NO, I THINK HONESTLY,
JUDY, THEY CONVINCED
THEMSELVES THAT THE TRIBES
WOULD COME OVER TO THEM AND
THAT THEY COULD SPLIT AWAY
ANBAR AS AN ENTIRE PROVINCE,
PUT IT TOGETHER WITH THE
WESTERN PART OF-- EASTERN
PART OF SYRIA AND BEGIN TO
HAVE THEIR OWN STATE.
BUT AS AMBASSADOR CROCKER
WAS JUST INDICATING, THEY
DID IT EXACTLY WRONG BECAUSE
THESE TRIBES IN ANBAR HATE
THEM.
THEY REALLY HATE AL QAEDA
BECAUSE THEY KILLED SO MANY
OF THE SHAKES IN 2004 AND
2005.
AND I'M FLABBERGASTED THAT
AL QAEDA THOUGHT THAT THEY
COULD GO INTO THESE CITIES.
FALLUJAH IS A TRAP.
FALLUJAH ONLY HAS FIVE
ENTRANCES, THAT'S NOT A
SMART IDEA TO GO IN THERE.
YOU HAVE TO ASK HOW YOU'RE
GOING TO GET OUT.
THE SECOND CITY CALDIA IS A
SMALL CITY, RAMADI IS THE
CAN DEAL IT A PERS THEY'RE
LOSING IN THE RAMADI TO THE
TRIBES.
>> Woodruff: WHAT IS THE
VALUE OF THIS TERRITORY, AM
WAS DOLLAR-- AMBASSADOR
CROCKER WHAT IS THE
STRATEGIC VALUE FOR AL QAEDA
TO GAIN IT AND FOR THE SUNNI
TRIBAL LEADERS TO HOLD ON TO
IT?
>> JUDY, FOR AL QAEDA THE
AIM HAS ALWAYS BEEN TO GAIN
AND HOLD A SIGNIFICANT
AMOUNT OF ARAB TERRITORY.
THAT FOR THEM IS THE BASE
FROM WHICH THEY WOULD SEEK
TO REESTABLISH THE 7th
CENTURY CALAFATE.
SO THEY ARE TRYING THAT IN
SYRIA, THEY ARE TRYING IT IN
ANBAR WITH LIMITED SUCCESS.
THE SETBACK THERE IS GOING
TO BE VERY IMPORTANT, I
THINK.
NOT ONLY IN IN IRAQ BUT ALSO
IN SYRIA.
BUT THAT'S WHAT THEY SEEK.
THEY SEEK THE SAME KIND OF
POSITION THEY HAVE IN
AFGHANISTAN PRE2011, EXCEPT
ON ARAB SOIL.
WE NEED TO BE VERY, VERY
CAREFUL TO DOFERING WE CAN
TO SEE THAT THEY DO NOT GET
IT.
>> Woodruff: AND AS BOTH OF
YOU ARE POINTING OUT, BING
WEST, WHAT AL QAEDA DIDN'T
COUNT ON WAS THE SUNNI
TRIBAL LEADERS IN EFFECT
ALLYING THEMSELVES WITH THE
SHI'A-LED GOVERNMENT.
WHAT IS IN IT FOR THEM TO
KEEP AL QAEDA OUT?
>> WELL, I HAVE TO SAY THAT
MY SOURCE FOR THIS NOW IS
TWITTER.
I HAVE TWITS TODAY COMING
FROM RAMADI SAYING THAT ABU
RISHA WHO IS THE GOOD GUY,
BELIEVES THAT ANDU AGO MAD
WHO IS THE BAD HAS BEEN
KILLED IN THE BATTLE.
HE HAS BEEN KILLED THREE
TIMES, THIS MAY BE THE
FOURTH TIME.
BUT IT DOES INDICATE THAT
THE PROBLEM HERE FOR AL
QAEDA THAT THE SUNNI TRIBES
WERE HANDLED VERY BADLY BY
PRIME MINISTER MALL AKI HAVE
SOMEHOW CUT SOME SORT OF
DEAL WITH PRIME MINISTER
MALL AGOEE, PROBABLY FOR
MONEY BUT DEFINITELY FOR
SOME POLITICAL POWER AND
THIS IS AMBASSADOR CROCKER'S
AREA BUT I CERTAINLY HOPE
THAT PRIME MALAKI HAS
LEARNED A LESSON FROM THIS.
>> Woodruff: AND ON THAT
POINT, AMBASSADOR CROCKER,
HOW DOES ALL THIS AFFECT THE
ABILITY OF DID-- OF THE
PRIME MINISTER TO HAVE ANY
SORT OF STABILITY IN THIS
COUNTRY.
WE'VE BEEN WATCHING
INCREASED VIOLENCE, THERE
HAVE BEEN SUICIDE BOMBINGS,
VIRTUALLY.
WE'VE BEEN REPORTING ON IT
EVERY DAY, IN IRAQ.
HOW DOES ALL THIS PLAY INTO
HIS ABILITY TO KEEP HIS
COUNTRY STABLE?
>> TWO KEY POINTS, JUDY.
FIRST OUTSIDE OF AN BAR THE
THE SUICIDE BOMBINGS WERE
ALMOST EXCLUSIVELY THE WORK
OF AL QAEDA ATTEMPTING TO
INSIGHT SECTARIAN VIOLENCE
AMONG IRAQIS.
THEY HAVE NOT SUCCEEDED.
IT'S VERY IMPORTANT THAT THE
PRIME MINISTER WORK WITH
LEADERS AROUND THE COUNTRY
TO SEE THAT THEY DON'T.
AND IN ANBAR WHERE THERE
HAVE BEEN SIGNIFICANT
SECTARIAN VIOLENCE THAT
SPARKED THIS WHOLE THING OFF,
LESS THAN A WEEK AGO, A
DISASTER FOR THE PRIME
MINISTER IS NOW A GOLDEN
OPPORTUNITY.
AS BING SAYS, THEY HAVE
FORGED A TEMPORARY ALLIANCE
AT LEAST FACING A COMMON
THREAT AND IT'S THE PRIME
MINISTER'S OPPORTUNITY
WORKING WITH INDIVIDUALS
LIKE RISHA TO MAKE THAT
ALLIANCE MUCH MORE PERMANENT
NOW THAT THEY HAVE SEEN WHAT
AL QAEDA WILL TRY TO DO.
>> BINGE WEST WHAT IS IN THE
U.S. INTEREST HERE.
WHAT LEADS TO THE KIND OF
STABILITY WE WERE JUST
TALKING ABOUT WITH
AMBASSADOR CROCKER.
>> WELL, IT IS AS THE
AMBASSADOR INDICATED IT
WOULD BE TERRIFIC AND OUR
EQUITIES IN THIS ARE
DEFINITELY TO HELP THE SUNNI
TRIBES AND AN BAR BECAUSE
THEY HELPED US.
AND BECAUSE THEY ARE A
STABILITY IN THAT REGION.
IF WE CAN GET THE TRIBES AND
PRIME MINISTER MALL AKI
WORKING-- MALL AGOEE WORKING
TOGETHER THEN WE CAN SEAL
OFF THAT BORDER AND PREVENT
AL QAEDA FROM EXPANDING ITS
AREA IN EASTERN-- IN EASTERN
SYRIA, WE CAN SEAL THAT OFF
IF THERE CAN BE A
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE
PRIME MINISTER IN BAGHDAD
AND THE ANBAR TRIBES OUT IN
RAMADI.
>> Woodruff: WELL, WE THANK
YOU BOTH, BOTH BING WEST AND
AMBASSADOR RYAN CROCK
FOREHELPING US UNDERSTAND
MORE ABOUT WHAT IS GOING ON
THERE.
WE THANK YOU.
>> THANK YOU, JUDY.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Woodruff: IT'S A CRITICAL
VOTE FOR A LABOR UNION, AN
AIRCRAFT COMPANY AND POSSIBLY AN
ENTIRE REGION.
JEFFREY BROWN HAS THE STORY.
>> Brown: IN NOVEMBER, MACHINIST
UNION WORKERS AT BOEING VOTED
DOWN A NEW CONTRACT EXTENSION.
PENSIONS WERE THE MOST CONTESTED
ISSUE.
AFTER BOEING OFFERED SEVERAL
REVISIONS, A NEW VOTE IS TAKING
PLACE TODAY, WITH RESULTS
EXPECTED TONIGHT.
THE STAKES ARE HIGH: THOUSANDS
OF JOBS AND THE BUILDING OF
BOEING'S NEW 777X PLANE.
IF THE UNION APPROVES THE
CONTRACT, BOEING SAYS IT WILL GO
AHEAD AND BUILD THE PLANE IN
UNIONIZED FACTORIES IN
WASHITON NGSTATE, THE COMPANY'S
HISTORIC MANUFACTURING HOME.
IF THERE'S ANOTHER "NO" VOTE,
BOEING SAYS IT MAY WELL GO
ELSEWHERE.
22 OTHER STATES RESPONDED TO A
SOLICITATION FROM THE COMPANY
WITH PROPOSALS TO BUILD THE NEW
JET IN THEIR AREAS.
JOINING US NOW: HARLEY SHAIKEN,
A PROFESSOR AT THE UNIVERSITY OF
CALIFORNIA BERKELEY WHO
SPECIALIZES IN LABOR ISSUES.
AND RICHARD GRITTA, A PROFESSOR
OF FINANCE AT THE UNIVERSITY OF
PORTLAND AND EXPERT ON THE
AIRLINE INDUSTRY.
START US OFF, EXPLAIN THE
PENSION AND OTHER ISSUES
HERE AND THE DILEMMA FOR THE
UNION MEMBERS VOTING ON THIS?
WELL, IT'S A REAL DILEMMA.
THIS WAS A VERY TOUGH
CONTEXT FOR THE UNION IN
THAT AS YOU MENTIONED,
BOEING COULD HAVE PUT THIS
NEW PRODUCTION IN MANY
PLACES.
THE FACT THAT IT MAY GO TO
SEATTLE IS AN IMPORTANT GAME
LONG TERM, POSSIBLY VERY
IMPORTANT FOR UNIONIZED
WORKERS AND FOR THE
MACHINISTS UNION ITSELF.
BUT TO DO THIS THE UNION HAD
TO GIVE CERTAIN CRITICAL
CONCESSIONS.
THE MOST CON FEBRUARICIOUS
IS THE PENSIONS-- CONTENTIOUS
IS THE PENSIONS.
THE WORKERS ARE GOING TO BE
GOING FROM A TRADITIONAL
DEFINED BENEFIT PENSION PLAN
TO A 401(k) WORKFORCE,
ALMOST HALF ARE OVER 50
YEARS OLD.
THEY'RE VERY WORRIED ABOUT
THE SECURITY OF THAT.
ALSO THE CONTEXT IN WHICH
THE VOTE IS TAKING PLACE, I
THINK, HAS CONTRIBUTED TO
SOME OF THE TENSIONS, THE
FACT THAT THIS WAS A RECORD
YEAR FOR BOEING IN TERMS OF
PROFITABILITY.
THE FACT THAT THE C.E.O. HAD
A $21 MILLION PAYCHECK.
THE FACT THAT SINCE THE
FIRST VOTE THERE HAD BEEN
$10 BILLION SHARE BUYBACK
AND A $51% INCREASE IN
DIVIDENDS, ALL HAVE PLAYED
INTO THE MIX.
>> Brown: ALL RIGHT AND
RICHARD GRITTA FROM THE
COMPANY PERSPECTIVE BOEING
FEELS ITSELF IN A HIGHLY
COMPETITIVE SITUATION,
RIGHT.
TELL US ABOUT THIS
PARTICULAR PLANE AND ITS
IMPORTANCE.
>> WELL, THE 777X IS THE NEW
GENERATION OF THE OLD 777.
AND IT HOLDS ANYWHERE FROM 3
R50 TO 400 PASSENGERS-- 350 --
>> SO THEY ARE GOING THE
INTERMEDIATE ROUTE TO
COMPETE AGAINST AIRBUS BUT
IT'S BEEN DOG EAT DOG IN
THIS INDUSTRY FOR A LONG
TIME.
AIRBUS TAKING THE LEAD AND
KIND OF ACING OUT BOEING AND
THEN BOEING GRABBING IT
BACK.
SO IT'S A VERY COMPETITIVE
INDUSTRY.
AND THIS PENSION SITUATION
AS MENTIONED IS CRITICAL.
THE USE OF DEFINED
CONTRIBUTION PLANS IS WHAT
BOEING WANTS TO PUSH WITH
THE UNION.
DEFINE BENEFIT PLANS ARE
WHAT REALLY BANKRUPTED
GENERAL MOTORS.
SO THEY CAN'T AFFORD TO RISK
THE CASH FLOW PROBLEMS WITH
THE DEFINED BENEFIT PROGRAM.
I THINK THAT'S THE KEY ISSUE
AS HAS BEEN POINTED OUT.
>> AND LET ME JUST STAY WITH
YOU, RICHARD GRITTA.
THIS QUESTION ABOUT MOVING
TO ANOTHER STATE, HOW EASY
OR DIFFICULT IS SOMETHING
LIKE THAT TO DO FOR BOEING?
>> WELL, IT'S NOT EASY, BUT
IT'S KIND OF AN APPLIED
CAPITOL BUDGETING DECISION,
ARE THE COSTS TO MOVE, TO
SAY ALABAMA OR TO NORTH
CAROLINA OR UTAH WHICH ARE
RIGHT-TO-WORK STATES, HAS TO
BE WEIGHED AGAINST THE
PRESENT VALUE OF THE
BENEFITS.
THE LOWER WAGES THAT THEY
WOULD PAY ELSEWHERE AND THE
FACT THAT IN NONUNION STATES
THEY COULD EASILY HIRE
PEOPLE THAT WOULD BE WILLING
TO GO WITH A 401 TRADITIONAL
PLAN.
>> SO I GATHER THAT MISTAKES
ARE SO HIGH, THE CONFLICT IS
SO DIFFICULT, OR INTENSE
THAT THIS HAS REALLY SPLIT
THE UNION IN SOME WAYS, THE
LOCAL VERSUS THE-- THE
NATIONAL AND INTERNATIONAL.
>> WELL, I THINK THAT'S BEEN
OVERPLAYED IN SOME IMPORTANT
WAYS.
THEY HAVE DIFFERENT
PERSPECTIVES.
THE INTERNATIONALS ARE
LOOKING AT THE LONG-TERM
FUTURE OF THE INDUSTRY.
THE LONG-TERM CREATION OF
JOBS AND A KEY TECHNOLOGY
THAT WOULD GO INTO SIGH AT
EL WITH HIGHLY PAID
UNIONIZED WORKERS, CARBON
FIBER TECHNOGYOL THAT COULD
DEFINE THE AIRCRAFT INDUSTRY
FOR DECADES TO COME.
SO THE INTERNATIONAL HAS
THAT LONG VIEW.
ON A GOT
MANY WORKERS THAT ARE SIMPLY
APPREHENSIVE.
THEY'VE SEEN WHAT HAS
HAPPENED IN OTHER
INDUSTRIES.
THEY WANT TO INSURANCE THAT
THEY GET A FAIR SHAKE RIGHT
NOW.
I DON'T THINK IT'S A RIFT.
I THINK THAT'S BEEN
OVERSTATED BUT I THINK THERE
ARE DIFFERENCES OF
PERSPECTIVE THAT ARE VERY
IMPORTANT GOING FORWARD.
THE IRONY HERE IS THAT AT
THE END OF THE DAY LONG-TERM,
THE MACHINIST'S UNION AND
ITS MEMBERS IN SEATTLE COULD
BE IN A STRONGER POSITION
WHEN A DEFINING PRODUCT, THE
777X WHICH IS GOING TO SHAPE
THE INDUSTRY FOR DECADES TO
COME, A NEW TECHNOLOGY AND A
VERY HEAVY INVESTMENT, ARE
ALL IN SEATTLE IN A
UNIONIZED SECTOR.
AND IT PUTS A PREMIUM ON
BOTH SIDES, THE COMPANY AND
THE UNION WORKING TOGETHER
TO MAKE THIS A VERY
SUCCESSFUL INVESTMENT.
>> RICHARD GRITTA, SO WHAT
ABOUT THE STAKES FOR
WASHINGTON STATE, FOR THE
ENTIRE REGION THERE, WHERE
BOEING DOES A LOT, STILL
DOES A LOT OF ITS
MANUFACTURING.
AND WHAT ABOUT THE STAKES
FOR THE COMPANY ITSELF.
I MEAN HOW MUCH IS IT
FRAMING THIS AS IMPORTANT TO
ITS FUTURE?
>> WELL, I THINK THE FRAMING
IT IS HIGHLY IMPORTANT
ESPECIALLY BECAUSE OF THE
PENSION PULLING SYSTEM BUT
AT STAKE ARE ANYWHERE FROM
8,000 TO 8500 JOBS
IMMEDIATELY.
AND THEN SOME ESTIMATES AS
HIGH AS 20,000 FOR ALL THE
PERIPHERY COMPANIES THAT
FEED INTO BOEING.
SO THIS IS HUGE.
WASHINGTON STATE HAS OFFERED
AN 8.5 BILLION DOLLAR TAX
INCENTIVE TO KEEP THE
COMPANY THERE.
THEY DON'T WANT IT TO GO.
BUT OF COURSE THEY'RE
BIDDING AGAINST ALABAMA,
NORTH CAROLINA, UTAH AND
SOME OTHER STATES FOR THE
PRIZE.
WHICH IS WHERE THEY'RE GOING
TO BUILD THE CARBON WINGS
FOR THIS AIRCRAFT.
AND THEY'RE TALKING ABOUT A
1.2 MILLION PLAN TO DO THIS.
>> AND HARLEY SHAIKEN IN OUR
LAST MINUTE WHAT ABOUT THE
STAKES THE UNIONS SHALL AND
I DON'T MEAN JUST THIS UNION,
BUT HOW DO YOU FIT THIS INTO
KIND OF LARGER ISSUES THAT
YOU LOOK AT?
>> WELL, I THINK THIS IS
CRITICAL FOR UNIONS MORE
GENERALLY.
YOU'VE GOT THREE THINGS
COMING TOGETHER HERE.
AN ICONIC PROFITABLE
COMPANY.
A STRONG UNION.
AND ALL THE PRESSURES OF THE
GLOBAL ECONOMY.
THERE'S SOMETHING IN SEATTLE
THAT IS CRITICAL FOR BOEING
GOING FORWARD WHICH IS THE
HIGHLY SKILLED, VERY CAPABLE
WORKFORCE.
YOU'VE GOT 8.7 BILLION
DOLLARS IN STATE INCENTIVES.
AND YOUE'V GOT A WORKFORCE
THAT'S ALSO VERY DEDICATED
TO THE FUTURE OF THIS
COMPANY AND THIS INDUSTRY.
IF BOTH SIDES CAN BRING THIS
TOGETHER, I THINK IT WILL BE
A MODEL OF A HIGH WAGE, HIGH
ROAD ROUTE TO
COMPETITIVENESS IN A GLOBAL
ECONOMY.
>> Woodruff: ALL RIGHT, AS I
SAID WE'RE EXPECTED TO KNOW
MORE ABOUT THIS TONIGHT.
WE WILL KEEP WATCHING,
HARLEY SHAIKEN, CHARRID
GRITTA, THANK YOU BOTH VERY
MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> YOU'RE WELCOME.
>> Woodruff: A STUDY PUBLISHED
IN THE JOURNAL "SCIENCE" THIS
WEEK FOUND THAT LOW INCOME
PEOPLE WITH MEDICAID INSURANCE
GO TO THE EMERGENCY ROOM ABOUT
40% MORE OFTEN THAN THEIR
UNINSURED COUNTERPARTS DO.
THE STUDY RAISED QUESTIONS ABOUT
THE LONG-HELD THEORY THAT
EXTENDING MEDICAID COVERAGE TO
MORE AMERICANS WOULD CUT DOWN ON
EMERGENCY ROOM USE.
IT INVOLVED THOUSANDS OF POOR
PEOPLE IN THE PORTLAND, OREGON,
AREA AND WAS CONDUCTED BY THE
OREGON HEALTH INSURANCE
EXPERIMENT.
HARI SREENIVASAN TAKES THE STORY
FROM THERE.
>> Sreenivasan: JOINING ME TO
DISCUSS THE REPORT IS KATHERINE
BAICKER.
SHE IS PROFESSOR OF HEALTH
ECONOMICS IN THE DEPARTMENT OF
HEALTH POLICY AND MANAGEMENT AT
THE HARVARD SCHOOL OF PUBLIC
HEALTH AND WAS ONE OF THE
AUTHORS OF THE REPORT.
WUFERNING HEADLINES, LET'S
DIG DEEP NEARS THIS, 40%,
THAT SEEMS LIKE A VERY LARGE
SPIKE IN ER USAGE.
WHAT DOES THAT ACTUALLY
TRANSLATE TO FOR THE PEOPLE
IN THE STUDY, HOW MUCH MORE
DID THEY USE IT.
>> WELL, ON AVERAGE PEOPLE
IN THE CONTROL GROUP WENT TO
THE EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT
ABOUT ONCE DURING THE 18
MONTHS THAT WE LOOKED AT.
AND PEOPLE WITHOUT GOT
MEDICAID WENT 1.4 TIMES.
SO THAT'S ABOUT A 40%
INCREASE.
IT'S HELPFUL TO THINK ABOUT
WHY PEOPLE WERE COVERED BY
MEDICAID VERSUS NOT IN OUR
STUDY.
OREGON HAD A LOTTERY FOR A
LIMITED NUMBER OF SPOTS INED
MEDICAID PROGRAM AND THEY
DREW NAMES FROM A WAITING
LIST BY CHANCE SO WE WERE
ABLE TO COMPARE PEOPLE WHO
DIDN'T GAIN ACCESS TO THE
PROGRAM THROUGH THE LOTTERY
TO PEOPLE WITHOUT DID.
AND THAT GAVE US A REALLY
GOOD CONTROL GROUP TO FIGURE
OUT WHAT HAPPENED WHEN
PEOPLE GAINED ACCESS TO
MEDICAID.
>> SO IS THERE A POSSIBILITY
THAT THIS IS A SURGE, IS 18
MONTHS LONG ENOUGH TO SEE
LONG-TERM PATTERNS?
>> IT'S A GOOD QUESTION.
LONGER-TERM EFFECTS MIGHT
CERTAINLY DIFFER FROM YOU
WHAT SEE OVER AN 18 MONTH
PERIOD.
ALTHOUGH WE DIDN'T SEE AN
INCREASE IN THE BEGINNING
THAT PETERED OUT IT LOOKED
FAIRLY STEADY OVER THE 18
MONTHS WE EXAMINED.
BUT CERTAINLY LONGER RUN
EFFECTS MIGHT DIFFER.
AND YOU ALSO MIGHT EXPECT TO
SEE SOMETHING DIFFERENT WHEN
INSURANCING MANY MORE PEOPLE
AT THE SAME TIME.
OUR STUDY HAD ABOUT 10,000
NEWLY INSURED PEOPLE.
THAT'S A LOT OF PEOPLE BUT
IT'S SMALL RELATIVE TO THE
POPULATION OF OREGON OR EVEN
RELATIVE TO THE UNINSURED
POPULATION IN OREGON.
>> AND SPEAKING OF THE
POPULATION IN OREGON, HOW
REPRESENTATIVE IS IT OF THE
REST OF THE COUNTRY.
SOME OF THE CRITICS OF THE
STUDY HAVE SAID MAYBE THE
POOR IN OREGON WON'T MODEL
THE SAME WAY THAT THE POOR
ARE IN THE REST OF THE
COUNTRY.
>> OF COURSE ONE ALWAYS
WANTS TO BE CAREFUL IN
GENERALIZING FROM ANY ONE
STATE TO OTHERS OR FROM ANY
ONE STUDY TO THE NATION
OVERALL.
THAT SAID, OREGON'S MEDICAID
PROGRAM LOOKS SIMILAR TO
PROGRAMS IN OTHER STATES IN
MANY WAYS.
IT COVERS THE SAME TYPES OF
SERVICES INCLUDING NOT JUST
THE EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT BUT
DOCTORS OFFICE VISITS,
PRESCRIPTION DRUGS,
HOSPITALIZATIONS.
IT HAS NO COPAYS FOREIGN
ROLLEES.
THE POPULATION IN OREGON
LOOKS SIMILAR TO THAT OF THE
U.S. WITH ONE IMPORTANT
EXCEPTION THERE ARE FEWER
MINORITY RES DIDN'TS IN
OREGON THAN IN MANY OTHER
STATES SO OREGON MIGHT NOT
BE VERY REPRESENTATIVE OF
RACIAL OR ETHNIC DIFFERENCES
THAT WOULD YOU EXPECT TO SEE
ELSEWHERE.
>> WERE THERE ANY SUBGROUPS
IN THE DEMOCRATS THA
THAT-- DEMOGRAPHICS THAT
WERE USING THE EMERGENCY
ROOM MORE OFTEN, PERHAPS THE
ELDERLY OR ONE GENDER OVER
THE OTHER?
>> SURE.
WE STUDIED PEOPLE WHO WERE
19 TO 64.
THAT'S THE GROUP THAT WAS
ELIGIBLE FOR THIS PROGRAM.
WHERE OLDER PEOPLE WOULD
ALREADY BE ELIGIBLE FOR
MEDICARE.
AND WE SAW INCREASES IN LOTS
OF DIFFERENT TYPES IT OF
UTILIZATION.
WE SAW PEOPLE GOING TO THE
EMERGENCY KEPT MORE, FOR
EXAMPLE, FOR CONDITIONS THAT
MIGHT MOST READILY BE
TREATABLE IN OTHER SETTINGS
IN PRIMARY CARE SETTINGS OR
EMERGENCIES THAT MIGHT HAVE
BEEN AVOIDED BY EARLIER
PRIMARY CARE.
WE ALSO SAW A BIGGER
INCREASE FOR MEN IN THE
PROBABILITY OF GOING TO THE
EMERGENCY ROOM DEPARTMENT AT
ALL.
>> SO WHAT ACCOUNTS FOR
THAT?
I MEAN IF PEOPLE ARE GOING
TO THE EMERGENCY ROOM FOR
CARE THAT THEY COULD HAVE
GOTTEN AT THE DOCTOR'S
OFFICE ELSEWHERE, IS IT
BECAUSE THEY DON'T KNOW THE
DIFFERENCE?
OR IS THERE A SPIKE IN THE
NUMBER OF PRIMARY CARE
PHYSICIANS THAT MIGHT BE
REFERRING PEOPLE TO THE
EMERGENCY ROOM?
>> THERE ARE A LOTS OF OPEN
QUESTIONS ABOUT THE
UNDERLYING REASONS THAT WE
SEE THE PATTERNS OF CARE
THAT WE DO.
BUT WE KNOW A COUPLE OF
THINGS.
FIRST PEOPLE ALSO WENT TO
THE DOCTOR MORE AND ALSO
WENT TO THE HOSPITAL MORE
AND USED MORE PRESCRIPTION
DRUGS.
AND ALL OF THAT IS
CONSISTENT WITH THE IDEA
THAT INSURANCE MAKES HEALTH
CARE MORE AFFORDABLE FOR
PATIENTS.
AND WHEN HEALTH CARE IS MORE
AFFORDABLE AND THE PRICE IS
LOWER THEY USE MORE OF A LOT
OF DIFFERENT KINDS OF
SERVICES.
IT'S POSSIBLE THAT PATIENTS
SITTING AT HOME WAY CERTAIN
SET OF SYMPTOMS LIKE
SPRAINED ANKLE THAT MIGHT BE
BROKEN OR PAIN THAT'S BEEN
AROUND FOR A DAY OR SO BUT
MIGHT GET BETTER, CHOOSE NOT
TO GO TO THE EMERGENCY
DEPARTMENT WHEN THEY WORRY
THAT THEY WILL BE FACED WITH
A LARGE BILL WHERE.
AS THOSE WHO ARE INSURED
DECIDE TO GO RATHER THAN
WAIT.
SIMILARLY IF THEY CALL THEIR
DOCTOR AND THEIR DOCTOR SAYS
I'M NOT SURE ABOUT THOSE
SYMPTOMS YOU BETTER GO TO
THE EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT,
THE UNINSURED MAY BE
RELUCTANT TO DO SO BECAUSE
THEY FEAR THE LARGE BILLS
THEY WOULD INCUR.
>> AND SO YOU PUBLISHED TWO
PREVIOUS SETS OF FINDINGS
FROM THIS STUDY.
ANYTHING MORE THAT IS COMING
OUT?
>> WE CERTAINLY HAVE MUCH
MORE DATA THAT WE'RE EAGER
TO EXPLORE.
OUR PREVIOUS STUDIES WERE
ABLE TO LOOK AT UTILIZATION
ACROSS A RANGE OF SETTINGS
LIKE THE DOCTOR'S OFFICE
VISITS AND HOSPITALIZATIONS
I MENTIONED BUT ALSO TO
ASSESS PHYSICAL HEALTH AND
MENTAL HEALTH.
AND WE SAW A BIG REDUCTION
IN DEPRESSION.
WE DIDN'T DETECT ANY OTHER
CHANGES IN PHYSICAL HEALTH
MEASURED LIKE HIGH BLOOD
PRESSURE OR CHOLESTEROL THAT
DEPRESSION RESULT IS ONE WE
WANT TO DIG INTO WITH MORE
DATA ON MODES OF CARE AND
TREATMENT FOR THAT
CONDITION.
WE ALSO FOUND BIG
IMPROVEMENTS IN FINANCIAL
SECURITY AND WELL-BEING THAT
SEEM VERY IMPORTANT FOR THE
WELL-BEING OF THE
INDIVIDUALS.
WHO WERE LESS LIKELY TO HAVE
A BILL ACCIDENT TO
COLLECTION AND IMPORTANT FOR
THE HEALTH-CARE SYSTEM,
WHERE THOSE BILLS SENT TO
CHRERX WERE NEVER PAID TO
PROVIDERS.
>> ALL RIGHT, KATHERINETHANKS IH
FOR JOINING US.
>> THANK YOU FOR HAVING ME.
>> Woodruff: NOW A DIFFERENT
LOOK AT PROVIDING CARE TO THOSE
IN NEED.
IT'S PART OF OUR OCCASIONAL
SERIES ON AGING AND THE
CHALLENGES OF PROVIDING LONG-
TERM CARE.
TONIGHT, WE FOCUS ON LATINOS,
WHO WILL COMPRISE 20% OF THE
ELDERLY POPULATION BY THE YEAR
2050.
THE "NEWSHOUR'S" MARY JO BROOKS
HAS OUR REPORT.
>> Reporter: SEVENTY-SIX-YEAR-
OLD NICOLASA ROMERO STILL GETS
TEARY WHEN SHE TALKS ABOUT HOW
MUCH HER LIFE HAS CHANGED AFTER
AN IMMIGRANT FROM MEXICO, SHE
HAD BEEN LIVING WITH HER
DAUGHTER IN SUBURBAN LOS
ANGELES.
BUT THE STROKE FORCED HER INTO A
NURSING HOME.
>> ( translated ): BECAUSE OF MY
STROKE, I CANT WALK.
I CANT MOVE ONE ARM.
MY DAUGHTER LIVES ON A SECOND
FLOOR AND I COULDN'T GO UP AND
DOWN THE STAIRS ANYMORE.
>> Reporter: ROMERO IS PART OF A
TREND AMONG LATINO SENIOR
CITIZENS.
TRADITIONALLY, THEY LIVED OUT
THEIR FINAL YEARS WITH FAMILY
MEMBERS WHO SERVED AS THEIR
CAREGIVERS.
BUT AS MORE AND MORE LATINO
HOUSEHOLDS HAVE BECOME DUAL
INCOME, THERE'S NO ONE LEFT AT
HOME TO CARE FOR THEM.
AND SO THEY ARE GOING TO NURSING
HOMES.
IN FACT, THERE'S BEEN A 58%
INCREASE IN LATINO ADMISSIONS TO
SUCH FACILITIES, COMPARED TO A
10% DECREASE FOR WHITES.
RASHMI BIRLA, WHO'S BEEN A
NURSING HOME ADMINISTRATOR FOR
14 YEARS, HAS SEEN FIRST HAND
THE SURGE IN INTEREST BY
LATINOS, ALTHOUGH SHE KNOWS IT
REMAINS CULTURALLY A TOUGH
CHOICE.
>> IT'S REALLY NOT EASY FOR
FAMILY MEMBERS WHEN THEY'RE
TOURING THE BUILDING AND THEY'RE
IN TEARS.
AND I JUST RUB THEIR SHOULDER
AND SAY ITS OKAY.
I UNDERSTAND ITS DIFFICULT.
WE'LL HELP YOU THROUGH THIS.
>> Reporter: BIRLA IS NOW THE
DIRECTOR OF THE COUNTRY VILLA
PLAZA IN SANTA ANA, A 144-BED
FACILITY WHERE 70% OF THE
RESIDENTS ARE HISPANIC.
>> MEXICAN VERSION OF BINGO.
>> WE GET THEM INVOLVED AND
IT'S NOT THAT THEY ARE JUST
SITTING IN THEIR ROOM.
AND THAT'S REALLY WHAT WE'RE
TRYING TO AIM AT, IS SAYING
YOU CAN HAVE A HOME LIFE
ENVIRONMENT BUT YET STILL BE
ABLE TO READ YOUR NEWSPAPER
WITH COFFEE
BUT THEN YOU CAN HAVE A BIG
FIESTA WITH A MARIACHI BAND.
AND ALL OF THAT MAKES A HUGE
DIFFERENCE IN HOW THEY FEEL AND
THE HAPPINESS THEY HAVE AND THE
COMFORT THEY HAVE.
>> Rorteepr: NICOLASA ROMERO
SAYS THE PEOPLE AT COUNTRY VILLA
HAVE BECOME HER NEW FAMILY AND
SHE NEVER WANTS TO LEAVE.
>> ( translated ): I WANT TO
SPEND THE REST OF MY DAYS HERE.
I WANT TO DIE HERE.
BECAUSE WHEN YOU DIE, YOU SHOULD
BE IN A PEACEFUL PLACE.
AND THIS IS A PEACEFUL PLACE.
>> Reporter: BUT CENTERS LIKE
THIS, WHICH CATER TO HISPANICS
AND OFFER HIGH QUALITY CARE, ARE
STILL FAR TOO RARE.
A BROWN UNIVERSITY STUDY THREE
YEARS AGO CONCLUDED THAT
MINORITIES, FAR MORE THAN
WHITES, LIVE IN FACILITIES THAT
ARE SUB-STANDARD, SUFFER FROMSTR
QUALITY OF CARE.
ITS ONE OF THE REASONS AL MENDEZ
SAYS HE WON'T CONSIDER THE IDEA
OF A NURSING HOME.
FOR MORE THAN FOUR YEARS, HE HAS
LPEHED CARE FOR HIS 77-YEAR-OLD
FATHER JAIME WHO SUFFERS FROM
PARKINSONS.
JAIME LIVES IN A SMALL COTTAGE
BEHIND HIS SON'S HOUSE.
>> HE'S MY FATHER, SO I WANT TO
CARE FOR HIM.
WE WERE RAISED THAT WAY.
TO TAKE CARE OF EACH OTHER.
SO HE'S ALWAYS WITH US.
>> Reporter: BUT A YEAR-AND-A-
HALF AGO, A SOCIAL WORKER TOLD
MENDEZ THAT HIS FATHER'S HEALTH
MIGHT ACTUALLY IMPROVE IF HE
SPENT A FEW HOURS DURING THE DAY
AT A SENIOR HEALTH FACILITY.
NOW, THREE TIMES A WEEK, JAIME
RIDES A SHUTTLE TO A PACE CENTER
JUST TWO MILES FROM HIS HOUSE.
PACE, WHICH STANDS FOR PROGRAM
OF ALL-INCLUSIVE CARE, WAS
STARTED IN THE 1970'S IN
CALIFORNIA.
THERE ARE NOW MORE THAN 90 SUCH
CENTERS ACROSS THE COUNTRY.
THIS ONE IS RUN BY ALTAMED, A
MANAGED HEALTH CARE COMPANY IN
LOS ANGELES COUNTY.
THE CENTERS ACCEPT ONLY PATIENTS
WHO HAVE BEEN CERTIFIED BY THE
STATE TO BE NURSING HOME
QUALIFIED, BUT IT IS A DAY
CENTER ONLY SO PATIENTS CAN
CONTINUE TO LIVE AT HOME WITH A
FAMILY MEMBER.
>> A POPULATION OF 88%
LATINO.
THEY OFFER EXERCISE AND
PHYSICAL THERAPY, BREAKFAST
AND LUNCH, NUMEROUS SOCIAL
ACTIVITIES.
>> AND FULL MEDICAL CARE.
>> I LIKE COMING HERE BECAUSE I
GET LOTS OF ATTENTION AND THAT'S
GOOD. THE STAFF TAKES VERY GOOD
CARE OF ME.
>> Reporter: ON THE DAY WE
VISITED, THERE WAS AN ELABORATE
CELEBRATION FOR THE FEAST OF OUR
LADY OF GAUDALUPE, WHICH
INCLUDED A CATHOLIC MASS, AN
OUTDOOR PROCESSION AND MARIACHI
MUSIC.
DR. ESIQUIO CASILLAS,  MEDICAL
DIRECTOR FOR ALTAMED SENIOR
SERVICES, SAYS TAKING PART IN A
BROAD ARRAY OF SOCIAL AND
CULTURAL ACTIVITIES IS KEY TO
IMPROVING HEALTH AND WELL-BEING.
>> THE WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION
ESTIMATES THAT ONLY 10% OF A
PERSONS WELL-BEING IS IMPACTED
BY MEDICINE AND MEDICAL CARE.
WHEREAS SOCIAL DETERMINANTS LIKE
NUTRITION, WHERE THEY LIVE,
POVERTY, ENVIRONMENTAL FACTORS
HAVE MUCH MORE IMPACT.
WHEN THEY COME HERE ON A REGULAR
BASIS, THEY GET SOCIALIZATION,
COGNITIVE ACTIVITIES TO HELP
THEIR COGNITIVE FUNCTIONING AND
THE PHYSICAL ACTIVITIES AS WELL.
>> Reporter: FOR 86-YEAR OLD EVA
ALLEGRIA, THE PACE PROGRAM
LITERALLY SAVED HER LIFE.
SHE HAD LIVED IN HER OWN HOME
FOR 60 YEARS, BUT WAS GROWING
MORE AND MORE DEPRESSED AS HER
HEALTH FAILED.
>> I WAS VERY DEPRESSED.
I WAS READY TO GO.
IN FACT, I ASKED MY FRIEND WHO
DOES WEDDING DRESSES, I TOLD HER
HOW I WANTED TO BE BURIED.
>> Reporter: BUT HER SONS HAD
OTHER PLANS FOR HER.
THEY ENROLLED HER IN THE PACE
PROGRAM, KICKING AND SCREAMING
SHE SAYS.
WITHIN WEEKS, SHE'D HAD A
COMPLETE TURNAROUND.
NOW SHE LOVES COMING FOR THE
FOOD, THE PARTIES, THE
CAMARADERIE.
SHE HOPES THAT IF SHE KEEPS
EXERCISING, SHE MAY EVEN GET OUT
OF HER WHEELCHAIR TO DANCE WITH
THE MARIACHIS.
>> I TOLD THAT GUY UP THERE,
WAIT A LITTLE LONGER.
>> THE TAB FOR THE SERVICES
IS PICKED UP BY MEDICARE OR
MEDICAL, CALIFORNIA'S
VERSION OF MEDICAID.
STILL IT'S EXPENSIVE TO
START A PACE PROGRAM WHICH
MAY EXPLAIN WHY THERE AREN'T
MORE OF THEM.
>> THERE IS A LOT OF INVESTMENT
UP FRONT TO GET THESE PROGRAMS
STARTED.
MANY OF THEM TAKE FOUR OR FIVE
YEARS TO GET STARTED.
ITS A MULTI-MILLION DOLLAR
INVESTMENT.
BUT I THINK THINGS ARE CHANGING.
THERE'S BEEN A LOT OF INTEREST
IN THESE PROGRAM IN THE PAST FEW
YEARS.
AND I THINK HEALTHCARE PLANS ARE
REALIZING THAT THIS IS REALLY
THE IDEAL PROGRAM FOR THE VERY
FRAIL PATIENTS WHO IS NOT YET IN
A NURSINHOMEG  AND CAN BE KEPT
OUT OF A NURSING HOME.
CALIFORNIA DO HAVE OTHER
OPTIONS FOR ADULT DAY
FACILITIES BUT STATE FUNDING
FOR THOSE PROGRAMS WAS
SEVERELY CUT THREE AREAS AGO
AND WILL BE AT RISK AGAIN
NEXT YEAR.
IT'S A SITUATION THAT COULD
BECOME ONE OF THE COUNTRY'S
BIGGEST CHALLENGES.
HOW TO PROVIDE QUALITY
LONG-TERM CARE FOR AN
ELDERLY POPULATION THAT IS
EXPECTED TO DOUBLE IN THE
NEXT 15 YEARS.
>> Woodruff: WHAT CAN YOU DO TO
KEEP YOURSELF HAPPY AND HEALTHY
IN OLD AGE? WE PREPARED SEVEN
TIPS FOR SUCCESSFUL AGING,
RECOMMENDED BY THE PEOPLE
FEATURED IN THIS SEGMENT.
READ THOSE ON OUR RUNDOWN.
>> Woodruff: AND TO THE ANALYSIS
OF SHIELDS AND BROOKS.
THAT'S SYNDICATED COLUMNIST MARK
SHIELDS AND "NEW YORK TIMES"
COLUMNIST DAVID BROOKS, WHO IS
IN NEW YORK TONIGHT.
WELCOME, FIRST PROGRAM OF
THE NEW YEAR AND I GUESS THE
POLITICAL EVENT OF THE WEEK,
DAVID HERE IN NEW YORK WAS
THE INAUGURATION OF THEIR
NEW MAYOR WHO SOUNDS LIKE
HE'S GOING TO MAKE
INEQUALITY AND DOING
SOMETHING ABOUT IT THE THEME
OF HIS LEADERSHIP.
WHAT DID YOU MAKE OF HIM AND
HIS MESSAGE?
>> WELL, WE'VE BEEN WAITING
AROUND FOR SORT OF A POP YOU
LOST REGRESS YOU HAVE.
I GUESS WE HAD ELIZABETH
WARREN IN MASSACHUSETTS BUT
HERE IS SOMEBODY RUNNING A
CITY ON THAT AGENDA.
TO ME THE QUESTION IS IT
GOING TO BE A NATIONAL
AGENDA.
AND I GUESS I'M NOT QUITE
CLEAR SURE YET.
CLEARLY PROGRESSIVE VOICES
ARE GOING TO BLAIR VERY
LOUDLY IN DEMOCRATIC CIRCLES,
IN LIBERAL CIRCLES, IN THE
AGO ADD ME, BECAUSE INEQUAL
SIT A GENUINELY SIGNIFICANT
ISSUE.
THE QUESTION IS CAN THEY GET
A BROADER-- A BROAD MOVEMENT
BEHIND THAT.
NEW YORK IS NOT AMERICA.
-- IN "THE NEW YORK POST"
TODAY POINTED OUT THAT IT
HAS BEEN 117 YEARS SINCE A
MAJOR OFFICIAL HAD NATIONAL
OFFICE OR EVEN BIG STATE
OFFICE AND THAT WAS TEDDY
ROOSEVELT SO IT'S BEEN VERY
HARD TO EXPORT NEW YORK
POLITICS NATIONALLY.
AND IT COULD BE THAT THE
DISTRUST OF GOVERNMENT IS SO
STRONG THAT EVEN THOUGH
PEOPLE ACKNOWLEDGE THAT
INEQUALITY IS A BIG SERIOUS
ISSUE, THEY DON'T QUITE
TRUST BIG GOVERNMENT
PROGRAMS TO TAKE CARE OF IT.
>> MARK, IS THIS A LIBERAL
MESSAGE THAT HAS LEGS
OUTSIDE OF NEW YORK?
>> YES, IT DOES, JUDY.
FIRST OF ALL, FRANKLIN
ROOSEVELT WAS A GOVERNOR OF
NEW YORK WHEN HE WAS ELECTED
PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED
STATES IN 1932.
>> NOT NEW YORK CITY THOUGH.
>> OH, NEW YORK CITY, OKAY,
I'M SORRY.
THE YES, IT DOES, JUDY, AND
I SAY THIS.
LOST IN THE RESULTS IN 2012
BECAUSE OF THE PRESIDENTIAL
RACE WAS THE FACT THAT WE
SAW A YOU POPULIST REVOLT IN
CALIFORNIA.
PUT TO THE BALLOT TEST,
PROPOSITION 30 JERRY BROWN,
THE GOVERNOR PUSHED IT.
THE STATE WAS IN DIRE
FINANCIAL STRAITS AND
FUNDING FOR EDUCATION WAS
WAY DOWN.
PROPOSITION 30 RAISED TAXES
ON COUPLES EARNING OVER
$500,000 A YEAR.
MILLIONS SPENT AGAINST T-1 1
MILLION BY ONE SECRET GROUP
ALONE SPENT AGAINST IT AND
IT PREVAILED.
IT WON, 89% OF US GOING TO
COLLEGE-- COMMUNITY COLLEGES
IN K THROUGH 12.
BILL DE BLASIO RAN ON THIS
ISSUE.
HE DIDN'T JUST PULL IT OUT
OF HIS HAT.
HE DIDN'T DISCOVER IT
BETWEEN -- RUNNING AND HIS
INAUGURAL.
AND DAVID'S RIGHT, DOES IT
HAVE ITS MOST INTENSE
SUPPORT ON THE COAST, YES.
PROBABLY IN SEVERAL ACADEMIC
AREAS.
BUT THE REALITY IS THIS IS A
REALITY-BASED MOVEMENT.
'S EITVERY WHERE.
INEQUAL SIT
ACROSS-THE-BOARD.
JUST ONE FIGURE, OKAY, IN
THE LAST FOUR YEARS LAST
FOUR YEARS SINCE BARACK
OBAMA HAS BEEN PRESIDENT,
95% OF THE WEALTH IN THE
COUNTRIES THAT'S BEEN
CREATED HAS GONE TO THE TOP
1% WHO OWN 33% OF THE STOCK.
I MEAN I THINK ANYBODY WHO
ACCUSED BARACK OBAMA OF
BEING A SOCIALIST OWES HIM
AND US AN APOLOGY BECAUSE
IT'S BEEN-- THE STOCK MARKET
HAD ITS BEST YEAR IN 17
YEARS.
COINCIDENTALLY THAT WAS WHEN
WHEN ANOTHER DEMOCRAT BILL
CLINTON WAS IN THE WHITE
HOUSE.
SO IT'S BEEN VERY GOOD BUT
IT'S BEEN VERY UNEQUAL.
AND ONE OF THE THINGS DE
BLASIO WANTS TO DO IS
UNIVERSAL PREK, THAT SAW A
RADICAL IDEA.
IT'S NOW A STATE LAW IN
OKLAHOMA, AND A STATE LAW IN
GEORGIA.
>> Woodruff: SO DAVID WHAT
IS THE STRENGTH OF
LIBERALISM IN THIS COUNTRY
TODAY?
>> WELL, I THINK THE PROBLEM
IS REAL, MARK IS ABSOLUTELY
RIGHT ABOUT THAT, THE
INEQUALITY, THE STATISTICS
ARE PRETTY OVERWHELMING.
THE QUESTION, IT SEEMS TO BE
TWO AGENDAS FLOW OUT OF
THAT.
ONE WHICH I DO THINK IS A
MAJORITY AGENDA IS THE
ARGUMENT THAT BASICALLY
ECONOMIC SYSTEM IS WORKING
BUT A LOT OF PEOPLE DON'T
HAVE ACCESS TO IT AND
THEREFORE YOU WANT TO INVEST
HEAVILY IN HUMAN CAPITAL N
PREK, IN COMMUNITY COLLEGES,
IN EDUCATION.
AND YOU WANT TO GIVE PEOPLE
ACCESS.
I THINK THAT IS A MAJORITY
AGENDA THAT IS PROBABLY A
CENTER LEFT, EVEN SOME
CENTER RIGHT THE SECOND
AGENDA IS THE ECONOMIC
SYSTEM FUNDAMENTALLY IS NOT
WORK, THAT WE HAVE DEEP
STRUCTURAL PROBLEMS THAT ARE
LEADING TO THIS WIDENING
INEQUALITY AND YOU WANT TO
ODD RES THE DEEP STRUCTURAL
PROBLEMS IN THE ECONOMY WITH
MUCH MORE REDISTRIBUTION,
MUCH HIGHER TAXES ON THE
AFFLUENT AND THEREFORE
REDISTRIBUTING THE MONEY
DOWN.
I DO NOT BELIEVE THAT IS A
MAJORITY AGENDA WHETHER IT'S
JUSTIFIED OR NOT.
I JUST THINK RIGHT NOW I
THINK THERE ARE SEVEN
DEMOCRATIC SENATORS RUNNING
FOR RE-ELECTION RIGHT NOW IN
STATES THAT MITT ROMNEY WON.
I DO NOT THINK THOSE 7
SENATORS ARE GOING TO BE
ENDORSING ANY SORT OF
REDISTRIBUTIVE PROGRAM OR
MUCH BIG GOVERNMENT PROGRAM
THIS YEAR OR ANY TIME SOON.
>> Woodruff: MARK WHAT ABOUT
THAT, AND CONNECT IT TO WHAT
IS PRESIDENT IS TELLING.
BECAUSE HE SAID HE WANTS TO
DEVOTE THE REST OF HIS
PRESIDENCY TO INEQUALITY.
WHAT IS HE GOING TO BE ABLE
TO DO IN THAT REGARD?
>> WELL, I MEAN, THERE ARE
STEPS.
THE PRESIDENT IS, IN FACT, I
MEAN THIS IS AN ISSUE
WAITING TO BE GALVANIZED,
WAITING TO BE ENERGIZED, I
THINK THERE IS NO QUESTION,
JUDY.
FIRST OF ALL, MINIMUM WAGE,
VERY SIMPLE.
3/4-- THREE FOURTHS OF
INDEPENDENTS FAVOR RAISING
THE MINIMUM WAGE FROM 7.25
TO $9 AN HOUR.
THE MAJORITY OF REPUBLICANS
DO.
NOW THERE'S A MAJORITY OF
REPUBLICANS AND HOUSE
REPRESENTATIVES WHO DON'T.
THERE'S WHEN YOU COME DOWN
TO POLITICAL SKILL.
ORGANIZING, GALVANIZING,
PUBLIC OPINION TO PUSH THAT
THROUGH.
THE EXTENSION OF
UNEMPLOYMENT INSURANCE
BENEFITS TO THE LONG-TERM
UNEMPLOYED, WHO ARE
SUFFERING THE MOST IN THIS
ENTIRE RECESSION.
AND NOW ALL OF A
SUDDEN-- WITHIN WAITING TO
SEE.
>> NOW ALL OF A SUDDEN IT
HAS BECOME-- AN ARTICLE OF
FAITH ON THE PART OF
REPUBLICANSN  ICONGRESS THAT
THIS HAS TO BE OFFSET IN
SPENDING.
THAT WAS NOT THE CASE WHEN
GEORGE W. BUSH, THE LAST
PRESIDENT TO PROPOSE
EXTENSION OF UNEMPLOYMENT
INSURANCE BENEFITS PREVAILED.
THEY DIDN'T INSIST THEN BUT
IT A DIFFERENT RULE NOW.
I THINK THAT'S WHEN YOU CAN
SHOW INCONSISTENCY,
CONTRADICTION.
THESE ARE JUST THE FIRST
STEPS BUT DAVID'S RIGHT, THE
SYSTEM, OUR SYSTEM PRODUCES
GREAT WEALTH IT IS LOUSY AT
REDISTRIBUTING IT.
>> I WOULD SAY --
>> WHICH WOULD JUST SAY IT'S
IMPORTANT TO REALIZE HOW
DEEP THE PROBLEM IS.
THE STRUCTURAL PROBLEM
BEHIND INEQUALITY, IT IS
COMPLICATED BUT ONE OF THEM
SIGNIFICANTLY IS THE
EDUCATION PREMIUM HAS GONE
UP.
THE REWARDS TO EDUCATION
HAVE GONE UP.
WOMEN HAVE GOTTEN THE
MESSAGE, INCREASED THEIR ED
CAG LEVELS AND WE ARE SEEING
GAINS AMONG WOMEN.
THE WIDENING INEQUALITY OF
THE WAGE STAGNATION IS
SIGNIFICANTLY A MALE
PROBLEM.
MEN HAVE TO THE GOTTEN THE
MESSAGE.
THEY HAVE NOT INCREASED
THEIR EDUCATION LEVELS AND
THEREFORE THEY ARE THE ONES
PRIMARILY SUFFERING, THAT
SAY DEEP FUNDAMENTAL PROBLEM
THAT IS VERY HARD TO FIGURE
OUT HOW TO ADDRESS.
SECOND SORT OF RELATED
PROBLEM IS FAMILY STRUCTURE.
IF YOU'VE GOT A MAJORITY OF
KIDS UNDER AGE FIVE NOT
GROWING UP IN TWO PARENT
HOMES THAT TOO HAS A
SIGNIFICANT EFFECT ON
INEQUALITY BECAUSE THEIR
EDUCATIONAL OUTCOMES END IT
STATISTICALLY ON AVERAGE TO
BE WORSE.
THESE ARE DEEP THINGS HAVING
TO DO WITH FAMILY STRUCTURE,
MALES NOT RESPONDING TO
INCENTIVES.
AND I'M FOR EXTENDING
UNEMPLOYMENT INSURANCE BUT
THAT DOESN'T GET AT THE
REALLY CORE PROBLEMS THAT
ARE AFFECTING NOT ONLY US
BUT IN EUROPE OR ELSEWHERE.
>> Woodruff: NOR DOES
RAISING THE MINIMUM WAGE.
>> NO, BUT ARE THEY STEPS,
YES.
WHAT WE'VE DONE AND I THINK
MICHEL OF HARVARD RAISED
THIS.
OVER THE LAST FEW YEARS IN
THIS COUNTRY WE HAVE TAKEN
THE MARKET AND MADE IT NOT
AN-- WE'VE MADE IT OUR
SYSTEM.
I MEAN EVERYTHING NOW HAS A
PLACE.
AND IF YOU EVEN THINK ABOUT
POLLUTION, JUDY, YOU CAN
POLLUTE IF YOU WANT TO SPEND
ENOUGH MONEY.
THAT'S BECOME THE LAW AND
PATTERN OF THE LAND.
WE'VE MONETIZED JUST ABOUT
EVERYTHING INCLUDING I HAD
CASE.
EDUCATION THE GENIUS OF THIS
COUNTRY AND ITS GROWTH IN
THE 19th CENTURY FORWARD WAS
UNIVERSAL PUBLIC EDUCATION.
UNIVERSAL QUALITY PUBLIC
EDUCATION.
AND THAT IS A VALUE TO NOT
SIMPLY TO BE ESTEEMED AND
PROUD OF BUT IS CENTRAL TO
THIS COUNTRY RESURGENCE AND
RESTORING ITSELF.
>> ABRUPT CHANGE OF SUBJECT.
>> WHAT?
>> BUT THERE'S SOMETHING
ELSE, BOTH OF YOU, WE SAW
THIS WEEK.
FIRST WEEK OF THE NEW YEAR,
MARIJUANA IS NOW LEGAL
RECREATIONAL USE OF
MARIJUANA, DAVID, IN A
COUPLE OF STATES.
IN COLORADO WE SAW LONG
LINES OF PEOPLE WAITING IT
TO BUY THEIR FIRST LEGAL
MARIJUANA.
WHAT DO YOU SEE ABOUT THE
FUTURE IN THIS COUNTRY, DO
YOU SEE THIS SPREADING TO
MORE STATES.
YOU WROTE ABOUT IT IN YOUR
COLUMN.
>> I THINK WE'LL PROBABLY
SEE IT DECRIMINALIZED.
I'M NOT SURE WE'LL SEE IT
LEGALIZED.
I AM NOT IN FAVOR ALL THE
ARRESTS BUT WE'LL SEE HOW
COLORADO WORKS OUT IT IS A
GOOD FUTURE OF OUR SYSTEM,
AN SPERM.
WE WILL FIGURE OUT HOW IT
CORK WORKS.
I'M SKEPTICAL AND AM DUBIOUS
AND WOULD NOT HAVE SUPPORTED
IT FOR A COUPLE OF REASONS.
FIRST WHEN YOU DO GET
LEGALLIZATION, THE PRICE
TENDS TO COLLAPSE.
WILL YOU GET IT MUCH CHEAPER,
IF YOU HAVE CHEAPER
MARIJUANA MORE PEOPLE WILL
SMOKE IT.
THEN TAKE AWAY THE LEGAL
PENALTIES, MORE PEOPLE ARE
LIKELY TO SMOKE IT, SO WE
WILL HAVE STATES WHERE MORE
PEOPLE ARE USING MARIJUANA.
NOW I'M NOT TERRIFICALLY
OFFENDED BUT IT BUT THERE
ARE A COUPLE THINGS TO BE
WORRIED ABOUT.
ONE IS MORE TEENAGERS ARE
LIKELY AND THE SCIENCE
BEHIND THE TEENAGE EFFECT OF
MARIJUANA USE IS PRETTY
SEVERE.
IT DOES HAVE COGNITIVE
EFFECTS T DOES LOWER IQ
POINTS OVER THE LONG-TERM.
AT DICTION RATES ARE MUCH
HIGHER AMONG TEENAGERS THAN
PEOPLE WHO START AS ADULTS
SO THAT SAY GENUINE HEALTH
CONCERN.
AND THEN THE SECOND THING,
MOST OF US AGE OUT OF
MARIJUANA USE BECAUSE IT'S
NOT THAT EXCITING WHEN YOU
FIND MORE SERIOUS AND MORE
UPLIFTING PLEASURES.
SO MOST PEOPLE GIVE IT UP AS
THEY HIT MIDDLE AGE.
AND I JUST WOULD MAKE THE
MORAL STATUS ARGUMENT THAT
GETTING STONED ALL THE TIME
IS NOT THE GREATEST WAY TO
SPEND YOUR TIME IS SO IT'S
FINE WHEN ARE YOU YOUNG, TRY
AND PEOPLE WANT TO TRY IT
PERIODICALLY.
BUT I THINK THE STATE
THROUGH ITS LAWS SHOULD
ENCOURAGE A CULTURE THAT
DISCOURAGES THE USE OF
MARIJUANA ON BOTH MORAL
GROUNDS AND HEALTH GROUNDS.
>> WHERE DO YOU COME DOWN ON
THAT.
>> I DEFER TO DAVID ON THE
KNOWLEDGE OF THE SUBJECT.
IN HIS PERSONAL PIECE TODAY
WHICH I COMMEND TO ALL
OUR-- RECOMMEND TO ALL OUR
VIEWERS.
JOHN DENVER WAS A LITTLE BIT
EARLY ON ROCKY MOUNTAIN HIGH
T APPEARS.
THIS IS TOO LATE.
THE COLORADO LAW IS TOO LATE
TO SAVE THE ICONIC AMERICAN
BRAND TWINKIES, THEY'RE
PROBABLY DID -- HELP
DORITOES.
I MR. AMAZED BY THIS, I WILL
BE VERY FRANK.
THIS IS SOMETHING I MISSED.
BY 6 TO 1 MARGIN, JUDY, JUST
40 YEARS AGO WHEN JERALD
FORD WAS PRESIDENT OF THE
UNITED STATES AMERICANS
OPPOSED THE LEGALLIZATION OR
DECRIMINALIZATION OF
MARIJUANA.
20 YEARS AGO IT WAS BY A 4
TO 1 MARGIN.
AND 10 YEARS AGO IT WAS BY A
2 TO 1 MARGIN.
NOW A MAJORITY OF AMERICANS
SUPPORT IT.
AND THE STRANGE WAY IT IS A
LITTLE BIT LIKE THE LOTTERY.
STATE LOTTERIES WHICH AND
STATE GAMBLING.
AND THAT IS IT'S THROUGH TAX
MONEY.
IT'S ONE OF THE ARGUMENTS
THAT WAS MADE.
RAISING-- WITHOUT RAISING
TAXES AT THE SAME TIME
WITHIN GETTING THE BALLOT,
GETTING DONE.
AND I REALLY, I HAVE NOT
THOUGHT IT THROUGH I WILL BE
HONEST WITH YOU.
IT'S NOT SOMETHING THAT I
WOULD HAVE SPENT MY TIME ON.
COY UNDERSTAND SAME-SEX
MARRIAGE BECAUSE EVERYBODY
EITHER HAS A NEIGHBOR, A
NEPHEW A RELATIVE A COWORKER,
A FRIEND WHO IS GAY AND HAS
BEEN DISCRIMINATED AGAINST.
THIS IS ONE THAT KIND OF
THROWS ME.
>> BUT THE TAX REVENUE THING,
I CAN JUST SAY IS A BOGGUS
ISSUE, BECAUSE THE SOCIAL
COSTS RAISE COSTS FOR THE
GOVERNMENT TO MORE THAN
COMPENSATE THE TAX REVENUE.
>> GOOD POINT.
>> Woodruff: ALL RIGHT, WELL
YOU BOTH MADE FABULOUS
POINTS TONIGHT.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
DAVID BROOKS, MARK SHIELDS,
THANK YOU.
>> Woodruff: AGAIN, THE MAJOR
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE DAY:
THE WINTER SNOWSTORM THAT MADE
ITS WAY ACROSS THE MIDWEST AND
NORTHEAST IS NOW BLAMED FOR AT
LEAST 13 DEATHS.
EXTREME COLD FOLLOWED IN THE
STORM'S WAKE, WITH WIND CHILLS
WELL BELOW ZERO IN MANY PLACES.
AND AL QAEDA MILITANTS IN IRAQ
WAGED BATTLES IN FALLUJAH AND
RAMADI, AS GOVERNMENT TROOPS
WORKED WITH SUNNI TRIBESMEN TO
KEEP THE WESTERN CITIES UNDER
THEIR CONTROL.
ON THE "NEWSHOUR" ONLINE RIGHT
NOW, RHODE ISLAND BECAME THE
THIRD STATE TO ENFORCE A PAID
FAMILY LEAVE LAW THIS WEEK.
WHAT DOES THAT MEAN FOR THE
LABOR MARKET?
WE LOOKED AT THE FIRST STATE TO
PASS SUCH A LAW-- CALIFORNIA---
AND NEW RESEARCH ON ITS ECONOMIC
IMPACT.
THAT'S ON MAKING SENSE.
ALL THAT AND MORE IS ON OUR
WEBSITE newshour.pbs.org.
SOME UPCOMING PROGRAMS FROM
OUR PBS COLLEAGUES.
TONIGHT ON "WASHINGTON WEEK,"
THE PROSPECTS FOR IMMIGRATION
REFORM AND PEACE IN THE MIDDLE
EAST, A LOOK AHEAD TO THE
POLITICAL FIGHTS IN 2014.
ON TOMORROW'S EDITION OF "PBS
NEWSHOUREEKEND," CORRESPONDENT
JOSH ARONSON LOOKS AT A PROGRAM
BRINGING MUSIC TO LOW-INCOME
NEIGHBORHOODS TO IMPROVE
EDUCATION.
HERE'S AN EXCERPT FROM HIS
REPORT.
>> HE LIVES IN ONE OF THE
POOREST NEIGHBORHOODS IN OF
LOS ANGELES AND LIKE MANY OF
HER FRIENDS SHE WAS
STRUGGLING IN SCHOOL.
>> OKAY.
>> HER INTEREST IN LEARNING
MUSIC PROMPTED HER PARENTS
TO ENROLL HER IN A MUSIC
PROGRAM IN THEIR
NEIGHBORHOOD CALLED THE
HARMONY PROJECT.
IN THE THREE YEARS SINCE
MUCH HAS CHANGED IN HER LIFE.
>> MUSS SICK LIKE A DIALOGUE
BECAUSE WE CAN PLAY A
CERTAIN THING, LET'S SAY THE
VIOLINS CAN PLAY SOMETHING,
IT CAN BE THE SAME MELODY,
DIFFERENT NOTES.
AND IT'S LIKE A CONVERSATION
TALKING BACK AND FORTH.
>> SERVING MORE THAN 2,000
STUDENTS WITH A BUDGET OF
2.5 MILLION DOLLARS, THE
MOSTLY PRIVATELY FUNDED
HARMONY PROJECT IS FILLING A
GAP IN LOW INCOME AREAS
WHERE SCHOOLS HAVE CUT MUSIC
EDUCATION PROGRAMS.
STUDENTS GET AT LEAST FIVE
HOURS OF MUSIC CLASSES AND
REHEARSALS EACH WEEK
YEAR-ROUND.
FOR POOR STUDENTS IT'S
TUITION FREE INCLUDING THEIR
RESTAURANT.
>> Woodruff: AND WE'LL BE BACK,
RIGHT HERE ON MONDAY.
FROM SYRIA TO SOUTH SUDAN, A
LOOK AT THE MAJOR HUMANITARIAN
CRISES IN THE YEAR AHEAD WITH
THE HEAD OF THE WORLD FOOD
PROGRAM.
THAT THE'S "NEWSHOUR FOR
TONIGHT.
I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
HAVE A NICE WEEKEND.
THANK YOU AND GOOD NIGHT.